# Have Wal-Mart Supercenters Slowed the Rate of “Inflation”? The Effect of Wal-Mart Entry into Local Grocery Markets on the Consumer Price Index

Jeff Hoffman, Chris Bollinger, and Frank Scott Department of Economics University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY 40506-0034

Abstract:
This paper analyzes the price-index effect caused by the entrance of a well-known big box retailer into urban grocery retailing markets. We investigate the impact of entry by Wal-Mart Supercenters on the food-at-home component of the consumer price index (FAH-CPI) in urban grocery markets. The first Wal-Mart Supercenter opened in 1988 in Washington, Missouri, marking the entry of Wal-Mart into food retailing. Wal-Mart’s initial expansion into grocery was slow at first, with only 30 Supercenters by 1993. But it quickly rose to become the leading food retailer in the U.S., overtaking the Kroger Co. in 2003.
The impact of Wal-Mart’s entry into grocery markets can be easily seen. Taking the food-at-home component of the CPI across urban markets for the year of Wal-Mart Supercenter entry, 1988, and the end of the time period studied, 2005, one can calculate average price increases in markets where Wal-Mart has entered and not entered, and then compare the changes to get a “snap-shot” of the Wal-Mart Supercenter effect on prices. In markets where Wal-Mart has more than 5% share, more than 10% share, more than 15% share, and more than 20% share the percentage price increase is 5.4% less, 7% less, 10.4% less, and 15.6% less than markets where Wal-Mart Supercenters have not entered.
In addition to estimating long-run market responses to Wal-Mart entry, we take advantage of the sampling procedure used to construct the food-at-home component of the CPI to test for a short-run price response from incumbent firms when a Supercenter enters a food retailing market. When a Supercenter opens in a new retail grocery market, then only as expenditures at that store increase does it begin to be included in the store sample rotation and the CPI begin to reflect price changes of Wal-Mart Supercenters. So, initially CPI prices in food retailing markets where Wal-Mart Supercenters enter represent incumbent price responses only. Over time, the CPI price index will reflect both the incumbent price response and the lower prices offered at Wal-Mart Supercenters.
We were able to download Supercenter opening dates originally from Wal-Mart’s website, however, Wal-Mart removed the file from their website. The original file lists every Wal-Mart store opening date up to January of 2006 as well as individual store number, street address, city, state, zip code, and store type. Given the nature of our data on MSAs over time, panel-data techniques can be employed to estimate the effect that Wal-Mart Supercenters have on the food-at-home component of the CPI. This allows us to utilize both the variation of Wal-Mart supercenter growth over time within an MSA and the variation of Wal-Mart supercenter growth across MSAs to estimate the effects on price of Wal-Mart entry into retail grocery markets.
Results found using both a baseline empirical model that does not include lagged values of the FAH-CPI and a dynamic panel model that does include lagged values of the FAH-CPI provide strong evidence that Wal-Mart Supercenter entry and growth has a negative effect on the annual food-at-home price index for the twenty-four MSAs and CMSAs collected by the BLS. The marginal impact of a new Wal-Mart Supercenter is a reduction in the annual FAH-CPI in the range of -0.13% to -0.27% across all model specifications and estimation techniques used. Twenty-three of the twenty-four MSAs and CMSAs experienced Wal-Mart Supercenter entry and all of these markets experienced an increase in the number of Supercenters during the 1988-2005 sample period. The total number of Supercenters that entered these markets was 279 stores, which represents an average increase of 12.13 stores per market. Multiplying this average increase by the marginal effect of an additional Supercenter yields a FAH-CPI reduction of anywhere from 1.58% to 3.28% for the average market over the post-entry period, depending on the model specification and estimation technique used.
### DRAFT: for presentation at SEA meetings, Atlanta, GA, November 2014. Please do not quote without permission of the authors.
